This video is brought to you by brilliant.
You're gonna learn more about brilliant later in today's video,
but if you'd like to learn more about them right now, go to
brilliant.org/biographics.
You're also going to find a link in their description below
Felic or Augusto Meor trio. According to fourth century historian utopias,
that was the acclimation used to greet to new Roman emperors. In his time.
It expressed hope that the ruler would be more fortunate than Augustus and
better than Trajan. The historian lived 200 years after tradein,
but the memory of his reign of prosperity was still very much alive in the
hearts and the minds of the Roman people Trajan was part of the five good
emperors,
five successive rulers who presided over an 85 year period of affluence for the
Roman em empire of those emperors.
We can safely say that Trajan was the best of the bunch.
He enacted welfare policies for the poor restored,
confiscated properties and undertook numerous construction projects within
borders. He brought stability while outwardly he led military campaigns,
which saw the Roman empire expand to its greatest size ever.
He became the Paragon that all subsequent emperors aspired to emulate.
Although none of them reached the same Heights to honor his accomplishments.
The Roman center bestowed upon Trajan the title of optimist print caps.
The best route
Trajan was born.
Marcus ops tri on September the 18th 53 CE in
the city of Atica.
This was located Inia beta car Roman province,
which roughly corresponds to the modern region of, and the Lou in Spain.
This is in of itself significant because Trajan will become the first Roman
emperor to be born outside of Italy. His father was Marcus Pius, tri the elder,
a Roman statesman while his mother was Marcia,
a noble woman who was the sister-in-law of emperor TIS.
He also had an older sister named Opia MAANA who remained very close to her
brother throughout her life.
Trajan would often consult her as Emper when making important decisions sometime
during his reign,
he bestowed upon Opia the Imperial title of Augusta making her the first sister
of a Roman ruler to receive this honor.
Trajan extended this love and trust Toya's daughter sallon EDIA as
he him I've never had any children after PI's death.
Trajan had her day of agents gave the title of Augusta to his niece as a young
man Trajan distinguished himself with his military service.
He quickly rose through the ranks.
Undoubtedly helped by his father's position and influence sometime around the
year 86,
CE his cousin PLIs alias Hadis AER died and became one of
the guardians of his two children, his daughter, Alia Dedia Paulina,
and his son Publius alias HES. The younger,
the son would later succeed TRN to the throne of Romes emperor. He also,
during this period, he met and married.
Poer the Tina ancient scholars portrayed her as being a kind and intelligent
woman.
She took an active role during our husband's reign sponsoring initiatives to
help the poor and improve education. She outlived Trajan by a few years.
And when she passed on Adrian built her a temple and dare fighter Trajan's
military life is poorly documented.
We know that he was successful in and well liked by his fellow soldiers.
Something that would prove vital to his ascent of power later on,
he served as a tribute for 10 years or so and traveled to Syria when his father
became governor that in 89, CE Trajan was in command of his own Legion.
And he was sent to either Hasia or upper Germania to put down a co against
emperor.
Dominium discerns him the favor of the ruler who granted Trajan a consul ship in
In order to get a proper understanding of Trajan's rise to the throne.
We need a little backgrounds on the two emperors who came before him.
The affor mentioned de median a nerve de median ended up being the last ruler of
the Flavian dynasty and ancient sources would have us believe that he was a
cruel ruthless and egomaniacal tyrant. Modern historians tend to disagree,
however, and discern that these characterizations of the emperor were part of a
concentrated effort to denigrate him after his death.
It was almost certain that Domitian was an autocrat who ruled with an iron fist
and instituted a of personality around himself.
But his totalitarian tendencies were usually focused on one particular group.
The aristocracy of Rome, specifically,
he was constantly at odds with the Senate who powers the emperor tailed.
His policies in propaganda actually made the emperor pretty popular with the
people and the army Tait was assassinated on September the 18th, 19 C.
According to Stuart, he became an object of terror and hatred to all,
and was the target of a conspiracy organized by his own friends and favorite
freed men.
The emperor was slain in his chambers where he was stabbed seven times
Ever was crowns. The new ruler of Roman.
He immediately began restoring many of the liberties and privileges that had
been taken away by his predecessor.
Neva was the first of the so-called five good emperors. And as you would expect,
he did many things to earn this reputation. He brought people back from exile.
He put a Holtz to trees and trials and gave a lot of land to the poor.
He also instituted new policies to save money such as abolishing,
many sacrifices and spectacles selling large golden silver statues commissioned
by Domitian and forbidding that any such sculptures should be made in his own on
app. Although Nova was popular with the people and the Senate,
he failed to appease the army where support for Domitian was still strong.
The Pretorian guard demanded that the conspirator to assassinated the previous
emperor be executed, but never refused.
Now let's have a quick side note to give a little historical context on how
important it was for an emperor to have the approval of the Pretorian guard.
Although they began as an elite military unit,
they became the emperor's personal body yards under Augustus. From there,
they kept growing in size and influence until they turned into the defacto
police force of Rome.
There have been quite a few intrigues and assassinations where the guards played
a vital role. And maybe we'll talk about a few of those in future videos.
Let us know if you're interested in that in the comments below on one
particularly egregious occasion,
the Pretorian guard killed the emperor and then effectively sold the throne of
Rome by grounding their support to the highest bidder.
This happens in 193 CE when they killed pattern,
accent accepted an offer of 25,000 sess each to make DIDs
GIS. The new emperor of Rome,
his rain lasted a whopping 66 days before he was also assassinated.
So back to never.
And there was a problem with his reign and that was that he was old and in poor
health,
he was 66 years old when he took the throne and he had no children or close
relatives, the discontents of the army, plus the lack of a clear successor,
pretty much guaranteed civil war upon his death in an attempt to pacify the
soldiers,
never assigned commands of the Pretorian guard to Caspar aliens who
served as a Pretorian prefect under the mission.
This tactic backfired cuz aliens,
incited the men to get justice for their former Ember in July or August 97,
CE the Pretorian guard lay. He SED the Imperial palace,
took the men responsible for Dominion's death by force and executed them.
Another was not harmed, but his authority was in taters.
Only one thing could help him keep his position,
naming an air who was popular with the people, the army and the Senate.
And that air was Trajan. Now,
just before we get into Trajan's run is to the throne.
I want to take a moment to tell you about today's sponsor brilliance engineering
works like Trajan's bridge,
which we're going to be getting into in just a moment were all possible because
of a fundamental understanding of science and engineering,
brilliant belief that learning science and math,
it doesn't have to be darling to that.
And they've put together courses that are all about storytelling,
interactive challenges and solving problems. It's this hands on approach.
That's a really excellent way to learn.
And currently they have over 50 interactive courses.
And look here you are halfway through an educational video,
so you're probably already the curious type and brilliant can be a great way to
just take that curiosity a step further and understand the world even
more. For example,
you could track out their course on geometry fundamentals where you'll learn
things like angle axioms, 3d, geometry, coordinates, and a great deal. More.
It's a great intro to how geometry is used in the real world.
So effective learning. It's all about problem solving and brilliant.
They help you learn and practice just that.
It's a great compliment of videos like this. I mean,
it's all good to learn something here,
but take that learning a step further with brilliance so you can support
biographics help us do what we do and get unlimited access to all of brilliance
in depth, maths and science courses, just it over to
brilliant.org/biographics and get 20% off the annual premium subscription.
And let's get back to Trajan
Trajan's appointment came just in time. He was named err in October of 97,
CE a few months later on January,
the 27th never died of natural causes after 15 months as emperor Trajan who
was governor of Germania inferior when he heard the news was in no hurry to get
to Rome to start his new career.
Instead taking a lengthy tour of the Empire's frontiers scholars have suggested
he did this in order to ensure that he had the loyalty of the soldiers across
the Roman and domain, he did see fit to deal with a Pretorian.
He revolted against nerve though.
He sent for early ons and the rest of the muan ears to come to Germany for a
special employment there. And according to CAS Dio,
he puts them out of the way. It wasn't until the summer of 99,
CE the Trajan finally set foot in Rome's emperor.
Dio takes the opportunity here to compliments Platina Trajan's wife,
who upon the entering the palaces for the first time,
turned around to the crowd and said,
I enter here such a woman as I would thing be when I depart and indeed,
according to the historian,
she exhibited behavior beyond reproach during the entire reign
As emperor tri first turned his attention to DEHA a kingdom that mostly
corresponds to modern day Romania ins mul over DEHA had been in Newin Rome
on and off a few centuries during the mid first century BC,
a powerful Dayan king called Bura Bea had United all the various tribes under
his rule. Caesar was planning to lead a campaign there,
but was killed in 44 BCE. However,
bur Stewart was assassinated that same year and the kingdom slowly splintered
after his death. It wasn't until over a century later,
they reemerged as a MENA under king Duris and attacked.
The Roman province of MOIC Dian was emperor.
At the time he had to respond to this invasion.
So he launched the first Dian war in 87 sea,
a Roman army led by general,
Cornelius fucus crossed the Dan new and suffered a humiliating loss at
Tai. The next year, the renew defensive was more successful,
but Domitian still had to accept peace on favorable terms to the dations because
his army was needed someplace else to put down a rebellion.
But the new Dian king Des balls might have declared himself a client of RO,
but in exchange, he received money and craftsman,
which he used to improve DA's defenses and Armitt soldiers for decades.
This piece was a bit of an embarrassment for the mighty Roman em empire,
especially since the Daan still like to carry on border raids from time to time,
Cassio S D described debars as a worthy antagonist of the Romans,
a king who Shrew in his understanding of warfare and a master in pitched
battles.
Clearly Trajan agreed because he saw it necessary to deal with a threat once and
for all and restore some of the glory lost during DEIT failed campaign.
Trajan got the Senate's blessing to go to war and in 101 CE the Roman army
crossed the de river once again and invaded DEHA the Roman emperor.
It obtained a major victory over Debar at the second battle of tope,
a few more minor conflicts followed,
but in the ends Trajan decided to Sue for peace because he didn't want his army
to get caught in DEHA during winds this time, though,
the terms were considerably in Rome's favor among other concessions,
the days had to build a stone bridge over the Daniel,
which would make it a lot easier for Roman troops to cross the river.
Should they invade Daysha again,
this structure simply known as Trajan's bridge was considered quite a Marvel of
its time.
It was designed by a brilliant Greek architect called lados of Damascus,
who would also be responsible for other constructions ordered by Trajan.
The bridge only stayed functional for a few decades until emperor ore destroyed
it, but it remains the longest bridge of its kind for over a thousand years,
there was peace,
but Trajan understood that it was only a moment of respite until
regain their strength and 105 CE the two sides went to war. Again.
This time the fighting was more neck, neck.
As the Roman struggled to gain a decisive victory in 106, they laid siege,
the Dian capital,
and eventually forced the people inside to surrender by destroying their water
supply. Afterwards,
the capital was raised to the ground Des Baras committed sewer aside,
and instead of being taken prisoner and his head was brought back to Rome,
half of DEHA was annexed as a Roman province while the other half remained free,
but consisted of tribes that never United again, the lands had rich goldmines,
which provided great boost to the Roman economy.
Not to mention the tens of thousands of slaves who were sent back to Rome.
A few years later,
agents victory in the nation war was commemorated with a monuments called Trajan
column, which still stands today in Rome.
It is 115 feet tall and has a spiral bass relief,
which depicts all the important events from the wars.
It is actually the only source we have for some aspects of the conflict and
historians still debate.
If it is histor accurate or intended more as a propaganda piece inspired by
commentary Deb BEO Gallo,
Julius Caesar's firsthand account of his wars with the goals Trajan wrote Deb
bellaco deco. Unfortunately the book is lost to history except for one sentence,
which is quoted in a different work.
The sentence means we advanced to bur ABUS and then to a
Shortly after his triumph,
Trajan had an opportunity to add the Naty and kingdom to his empire.
This was significantly different from the fights he had with the nations.
It was already a client state of Romans after king Rabel thei soda died in
106. All it took was to move legions from nearby provinces.
We don't know specifics about the conquest,
but it seems that the troops encountered almost no resistance,
less than ATA kingdom came to an end,
as it was turned into a Roman province called Arabia pet.
The next few years of Trajan's reign were peaceful and they allowed the to focus
his attention on improving things back home.
He had 123 days of games and festivities to celebrate his victory in the
Dian wars.
He built and improved roads and bridges such as the 205 Mar via Triano,
which can still be found partially today in Rome,
he put apple auras of damascus's talents to good.
The architect designed and constructed a new market baths and a forum,
which would become the last of the Imperial for built in ancient Rome.
The only improvements they could have used was a bit more creativity with the
names predictably. They were called Trajan's market.
The Barss of Trajan and trades forum are the constructions ordered by the
emperor included libraries, aqui temples,
and a renovation of the circus Maximus, which saw it rebuilt entirely in stone.
Cassius S D mentions in passing that Trajan was the target of several plots
against him. He only names one conspirator as crass.
Obviously these conspiracies fails and the emperor brought CRAs before the
senates to be punished.
What exactly happens to him in his co-conspirators remain a mystery as the
historian specifies that Trajan made an oath not to shed blood by which he meant
Roman blood, of course, and that he kept this vow
In 113 CE Trajan ended a conflict with the Pathan empire,
a powerful entity located in ancient Iran.
Like DEHA Paia had been a thorn in room side as Cass between the two
domains went back centuries. Also like DEHA,
Trajan sought to be the one to solve this problem permanently and enjoy the
renowned and acclamations that would come with it. In fact,
the emperor's complete true motives remained somewhat of a hot topic among Roman
historians. Some see as being practical,
Trajan wanted to strengthen the defenses of his Eastern frontier and benefits
from the economic boost of adding path here to the Roman empire.
Others believe it was simply in his nature.
Trajan was a military man first and foremost,
and would've likely gone on waring as long as he could.
And some pine that Tren wanted to emulate the conquest Alexander the great and
secure for himself, the near divine status that the latter enjoyed,
whatever the reason in 113, CE Trajan marched leaving Rome.
And he would never return located between the two empires was the kingdom of
Armenia. Although technically independent,
it fell under the Heman of both Rome and Paia and both powers had a vested
interest in ensuring that the ruler of Armenia was on their side in 110 CE
the Pathan prince AARA was installed as king of Armenia by his uncle
king a is the first of Paia without Roman approval on his way to Armenia,
Trajan met with an Emissary of the Pathan king in an attempt to appease room.
Austria's had deposed Aari and installed his brother,
Parham Cyrus as the new ruler of Armenia and sought Trajan's approval for this
change. Why exactly he thought the emperor would be okay with one brother,
but not the other. We don't know Trajan was gracious to his guests,
but mostly ignored their requests and kept on marching. The conquest of Armenia,
it was quick and bloodless king Parma Cyrus ended Trajan's camp,
took his di off his head and surrendered it to the emperor.
He fully expected to get it back and become a client king of Rome in a move
reminiscent of what ne road did with king te Dees half a century prior instead
Trajan kept Armenia was an you Roman provinces installed governor to rule path
Cyrus. He died soon after Rens all over the circumstances are not known.
Some have speculated that he was killed on Trajan's orders
In 115 CE the emperor launched his Mesopotamian campaign.
The exact order of events is on clear from ancient sources.
Besides the Pathan empire,
the region was full of small kingdoms and city states with Kings and
satraps like sending gifts and invoices to ensure they obtained the favor of
Rome. Trajan split his army into divisions that went after multiple targets.
He was then able to capture quick succession,
a Ben Babylon Chax and Salus culminating with the conquest of the
Pathan capital. At this point,
the remin bar reached its greatest size in history.
Cassie's D writes that Trajan was tempted to March into India like Alexander.
The great did, but concluded that he was getting too old for this thing.
Instead he was condemned with making a trip up to battle on and offering
sacrifice in the house where Alexander died.
He did make sure to specify in writing to the centers though,
that he advanced further than Alexander.
Although keeping his new possessions proved to be a bit of a problem when Trajan
left many of the domains he conquered began rebelling and the garrisons that
stayed behind were not enough to maintain control is also at this time that the
emperor health started to decline.
And some historians believe that he might have suffered heatstroke while laying
siege, the city of hat trap to make matters,
worse Jewish populations in multiple regions,
such as siren and Egypt to began uprising. And Trajan had no choice,
but to divert armies, to deal with these revolts
Trajan hopes that this would be a minor setback.
He left his troops in charge of his generals and set sail for Italy to regain
his health.
He then planned to return take command again and settle any conflicts that
remains. That's not how things panned out though.
He died suddenly on August the eighth for 117 CE aged
63 in the port town of Seus in modern day Turkey.
His cause of death remains somewhat controversial.
Some sources say he died of a stroke,
although both modern and ancient historians make mention of poison.
His succession was also a bit contentious.
His cousin Hadrian followed him through the throne,
but whether actually named him as his heir or whether this was arranged by
his wife Platina after his death remains debatable.
One of Adrian's first acts was to pull out of Mesopotamia,
as it became clear that Rome did not have the resources to keep the region
Trajan might have ultimately failed in his Pathan campaign,
but he left behind a cherished legacy that is still celebrated today.
So I really hope you enjoy bear video. If you did,
please do smash that live button below, and don't forget to subscribe also,
please do check it off. Fantastic sponsor. Brilliant.
There is a link to them below and as a way is thank you for watching.